##front [BBC TV Film Leader]
L4-cue_0b
##front Credits: Cornell University U.S.A., The Character of Physical Law, Professor Richard Feynman gives the Messenger Lectures
L4-cue_0
##Title Symmetry in Physical Law
L4-cue_1
#Symmetry seems to be absolutely fascinating to the human mind.
L4-cue_2
We like to look at symmetrical things in nature such as balls, which are perfectly symmetrical,
L4-cue_3
spheres—like planets and the sun, and so on—or symmetrical crystals, snowflakes,
L4-cue_4
flowers (which are nearly symmetrical), and so on.
L4-cue_5
But it’s not the objects in nature—the symmetry of the objects in nature—that I want to talk
L4-cue_6
about tonight, it’s rather the symmetry of the physical laws themselves.
L4-cue_7
#Now, how can a physical law have a symmetry?
L4-cue_8
It’s easy to understand how an object has a symmetry; of course, it can’t.
L4-cue_9
But physicists delight themselves by using ordinary words for something else, and so,
L4-cue_10
in this case, they have a thing about the physical laws which is very close to symmetry
L4-cue_11
of objects, and they call it the "symmetry
L4-cue_12
of the laws"-and that’s what I’m going to talk about.
L4-cue_13
#To show how close it is, I asked for a definition of symmetrical: what is symmetry?
L4-cue_14
If you look at me, I’m symmetrical right and left—apparently, at least.
L4-cue_15
A vase can be symmetrical that particular way, or in other ways.
L4-cue_16
How can you define it?
L4-cue_17
Well, Professor Weyl, a mathematician, gave an excellent definition of symmetry; it is this:
L4-cue_18
as I am left and right symmetric, that means that if you put everything that’s on this side
L4-cue_19
on this side—and vice versa, if you just exchange the two sides—it’ll look exactly
L4-cue_20
the same.
L4-cue_21
#Or, for instance, a square has a symmetry—
L4-cue_22
a special kind: if I turn it around to 90 degrees, it still looks exactly the same.
L4-cue_23
So, Weyl said, a thing is symmetrical if there’s something that you can do to it,
L4-cue_24
so that after you’re finished doing it, it looks the same as it did before.
L4-cue_25
That is the sense in which we say that the laws of physics are symmetrical:
L4-cue_26
that there are things that we can do to the physical laws,
L4-cue_27
or to our way of representing the physical laws, which make no difference
L4-cue_28
and leave everything unchanged in its effects.
L4-cue_29
#This aspect of physical laws are what’s going to concern us tonight.
L4-cue_30
We will take a number of examples.
L4-cue_31
#The simplest example of all, of a kind of symmetry (as you’ll see,
L4-cue_32
it’s not the same as you would have thought—left and right symmetric, or anything like that),
L4-cue_33
is a symmetry called translation in space.
L4-cue_34
That has the following meaning: if you build any kind of apparatus, or do any kind of experiment
L4-cue_35
with some things, and then go and build the same apparatus with the same—do the same kind
L4-cue_36
of experiment with similar things, but put them here instead of there (merely translate it
L4-cue_37
from one place to the other in space), then the same thing will happen in the translated thing
L4-cue_38
that would have happened in the original thing.
L4-cue_39
#(It’s not really true, actually: if I actually built such an apparatus,
L4-cue_40
and then displaced it 20 feet in that direction, it would get into the wall,
L4-cue_41
and there would be difficulties.)
L4-cue_42
It’s necessary, in defining this idea, to take into account everything
L4-cue_43
that might affect the situation—so that when you move the thing, you move everything.
L4-cue_44
For example, if the system involved a pendulum, and I moved it 20,000 miles to the right,
L4-cue_45
it wouldn’t work right any more, because the pendulum involves the attraction
L4-cue_46
of the earth-but if I imagine I move the earth and the equipment,
L4-cue_47
then it will behave the same way.
L4-cue_48
So the problem-the situation is, that you must translate everything
L4-cue_49
which may have any influence on the situation.
L4-cue_50
#Now, that sounds a little dopey, because it sounds like, "Well, uh just translate it,
L4-cue_51
and if it doesn’t work, then you didn’t translate enough stuff!"—you’re bound to win.
L4-cue_52
Actually, not: you see, it’s not self—evident that you’re bound to win.
L4-cue_53
The remarkable thing about nature is that it is possible to translate enough stuff
L4-cue_54
so that it does behave the same way—that’s a positive statement.
L4-cue_55
#Now, I would like to illustrate that such a thing is true from the statement of the law
L4-cue_56
of gravitation, for example, which said that the forces between the objects was inversely
L4-cue_57
as the square of the distance between them—and I remind you that a thing responds to a force
L4-cue_58
by changing its velocity, as time goes on, in the direction of the force.
L4-cue_59
Now, if I move something from here to here—a pair of objects like a planet going
L4-cue_60
around the sun-and move the whole pair over, then the distance between the objects,
L4-cue_61
of course, doesn’t change, and so the forces don’t change.
L4-cue_62
And further, when they moved over a situation at the same speed, then all the changes will remain
L4-cue_63
in proportion; everything will go around in the two systems exactly the same way.
L4-cue_64
Because the law said, the distance between the objects—rather than some absolute distance
L4-cue_65
from the central eye of the universe, but it talked about distance
L4-cue_66
between the objects—then it means that the laws are translatable in space.
L4-cue_67
#I give another example of symmetry.
L4-cue_68
That first symmetry is translates in space; the next one could be called translation in time,
L4-cue_69
if you like, but better just to say, "A delay in time makes no difference":
L4-cue_70
if we start a planet going around the sun in a certain direction (this goes around),
L4-cue_71
and if we start it all over again two hours later—or, say, two years later,
L4-cue_72
with another beginning, starting the planet and the sun going
L4-cue_73
in the same way—it’ll behave in exactly the same way.
L4-cue_74
Because, again, the law of gravitation, as stated, talks about the velocity,
L4-cue_75
and never talks about the absolute time,
L4-cue_76
and when you were supposed to start measuring things.
L4-cue_77
#In this particular example, we are really not sure: when we discussed gravitation,
L4-cue_78
we talked about the possibility that the force of the gravity changed with time.
L4-cue_79
Now this would mean that the translation in time was not a valid proposition,
L4-cue_80
because if the constant of gravitation is weaker a billion years hence than now,
L4-cue_81
then it isn’t true that the motion will be exactly the same for an experimental sun
L4-cue_82
and planet a billion years from now, as it is now.
L4-cue_83
But as far as we know today—I discuss only the laws
L4-cue_84
as we know them today (I wish I could discuss the laws as we will know them tomorrow,
L4-cue_85
but I cannot.) but as far as we know—a delay in time makes no difference.
L4-cue_86
Actually, we know that isn’t really true.
L4-cue_87
That’s true for what we now call a physical law, but one of the facts of the world,
L4-cue_88
which is very different-well, which just may be very different, and may be not different
L4-cue_89
than a physical law—is the fact that it looks like the universe had a definite time
L4-cue_90
of beginning, that everything is exploding apart.
L4-cue_91
#Now, that, you might call a condition of geography, analogous to the situation
L4-cue_92
that if I say "I translate," [and] I don’t translate everything—I mean,
L4-cue_93
I have to move that wall, if it’s going to make any difference.
L4-cue_94
And in the same sense, you would say, "Oh, I see;
L4-cue_95
he means the laws are the same—the universe expanded,
L4-cue_96
and everything else—but we could have made another analysis
L4-cue_97
in which we start the universe later."
L4-cue_98
#But we don’t start the universe, and we have no control on the situation.
L4-cue_99
And we have no way to define that idea experimentally.
L4-cue_100
Therefore, as far as the science is concerned, there really is no way to tell.
L4-cue_101
The fact of the matter is, that the conditions of the world are changing in time (as we know,
L4-cue_102
apparently); at least the galaxies are all separating from one another—so if you were
L4-cue_103
to awake in some science fiction story, at an unknown time,
L4-cue_104
[then] by measuring the distances (the average distances to the galaxies),
L4-cue_105
you could tell when it was—and that means
L4-cue_106
that the world will not look the same, if delayed in time.
L4-cue_107
Now, it is conventional today to separate the physical laws which tell how things will move,
L4-cue_108
if you start them at a given condition, from the statement
L4-cue_109
of how the world actually began—because we know so little about that,
L4-cue_110
and it is usually considered that astronomical history (or cosmological history,
L4-cue_111
or whatever you want) is a little different than physical laws—but if put to a test
L4-cue_112
of how would you define the difference, I would be hard pressed.
L4-cue_113
#The best characteristic of physical law is its universality, and if there’s anything universal
L4-cue_114
about the thing, it’s the universal expansion
L4-cue_115
of all the nebulae-so I have no way of defining that.
L4-cue_116
But if I restrict myself to disregard that matter,
L4-cue_117
then as far as the other physical laws are known—(and the law
L4-cue_118
that determines how the thing expands, or, I mean, the cause of it, and so on,
L4-cue_119
is not known)—if you take only the physical laws that are known,
L4-cue_120
a delay in time makes no difference.
L4-cue_121
#Now, we take some other examples.
L4-cue_122
Another is a rotation in space, a fixed rotation: if I build a piece of equipment,
L4-cue_123
and do some experiment with a piece of equipment built here
L4-cue_124
and then take another one (better translate it so it doesn’t get in the way) here—but turn it
L4-cue_125
so that all the axes are a different direction, it’ll work the same way.
L4-cue_126
Again, we have to turn everything that’s relevant: if the thing is a grandfather clock,
L4-cue_127
and you turn it this way, well, the pendulum would just sit up against the wall of the can;
L4-cue_128
it won’t work-but if you turn the earth too, as is going on all the time,
L4-cue_129
it still keeps working all right.
L4-cue_130
#The mathematical description of this possibility of turning is a rather interesting one,
L4-cue_131
because to describe what goes on in this situation, we like to use numbers to tell
L4-cue_132
where something is—they’re called the coordinates of a point.
L4-cue_133
We use, for instance, sometimes, three numbers to do it: how high it is above some plane,
L4-cue_134
how far it is in front of me, say (and back is the negative numbers), and how far to the left.
L4-cue_135
Suppose I did that.
L4-cue_136
(I’m not going to worry about up and down because for rotations,
L4-cue_137
I just have to use two of these three.)
L4-cue_138
Let’s call the distance this way X, in front of me, and Y is how much to the left;
L4-cue_139
then I can locate anybody by telling how far he is in front, how far to the left.
L4-cue_140
(Those who come from New York City will know that the street numbers work
L4-cue_141
that way very neatly—until they began to change the name of 6th Avenue!)
L4-cue_142
#Now, the mathematical idea about the turning is this:
L4-cue_143
that if I sit at a somewhat different angle, and make my calculations, then what’s directly
L4-cue_144
in front of me at distance X is a mixture.
L4-cue_145
Let’s say there’s a man over here (you), who’s standing this way, and making his analysis,
L4-cue_146
and me, standing this way, and making my analysis.
L4-cue_147
When I measure distance X, if I go straight out on X and don’t change to the right
L4-cue_148
or to the left, you’ll see that that line is a mixture of some of your X-ish business,
L4-cue_149
and some of the Y. So that the connection, the transformation, is that X gets mixed into X
L4-cue_150
and Y, and Y gets mixed into Y and X—and the laws of nature shall be so written
L4-cue_151
that if you make such a mixture and resubstitute it in the equations,
L4-cue_152
the equations will not change their form—that’s the mathematical way
L4-cue_153
in which the symmetry appears.
L4-cue_154
If you write, in mathematical form, the symmetry appears this way: you write the equations
L4-cue_155
with certain letters, then there’s a way of changing the letters from X
L4-cue_156
and Y to a different X (X'), and a different Y (Y'), which is some formula in terms
L4-cue_157
of the old X and Y, and the equations look the same—only you have "primes" (') all over them.
L4-cue_158
That just means that the man will see the thing behaving in his apparatus the same way
L4-cue_159
as I see it in mine, which is turned the other way.
L4-cue_160
#I give another example.
L4-cue_161
This example is very interesting; it’s a question of uniform velocity in a straight line:
L4-cue_162
it is believed that the laws of physics are unchanged
L4-cue_163
under the symmetry—under the operation—of making a uniform velocity in a straight line.
L4-cue_164
This is called the principle of relativity.
L4-cue_165
If we have, for instance, a spaceship, and we have a little equipment
L4-cue_166
in it that’s doing something, and we have another equipment down here
L4-cue_167
on the ground-and the spaceship is going along at a uniform speed-then inside the spaceship,
L4-cue_168
somebody watching what’s going on can see nothing different
L4-cue_169
than the man that’s standing still in his apparatus in there.
L4-cue_170
Of course, if he looks outside, or he bumps into an outside wall, or something like that,
L4-cue_171
that’s another matter, but insofar as he is moving at a uniform velocity in a straight line,
L4-cue_172
the laws of physics look the same to him as they do to me, who is not moving.
L4-cue_173
Since that’s the case, I cannot say who’s moving.
L4-cue_174
#Now, I insist and emphasize here something before we go any further:
L4-cue_175
that in all of these transformations and all of these symmetries,
L4-cue_176
we are not talking about moving the whole universe.
L4-cue_177
Just like the case of the time, I could imagine I moved all the times in the whole universe-
L4-cue_178
but that doesn’t make any difference: there’d be no content in the statement
L4-cue_179
that if I took everything in the whole universe and moved it over,
L4-cue_180
it would all behave the same way.
L4-cue_181
#The very remarkable thing is, if I take a piece of apparatus and move it over,
L4-cue_182
then if I make sure about a lot of conditions, and can include enough apparatus,
L4-cue_183
I can get a piece of the world, and move it relative to the average of all the rest
L4-cue_184
of the stars-and it still doesn’t make any difference.
L4-cue_185
And in this case, it means that someone coasting at a uniform velocity
L4-cue_186
in a straight line relative to the average of the rest of the nebulae sees no effect:
L4-cue_187
it is impossible to determine by experiments inside a car without looking out,
L4-cue_188
by any effects, that you’re moving relative to all the stars, if you want.
L4-cue_189
#This proposition was first stated by Newton.
L4-cue_190
Let’s take his law of gravitation, for instance.
L4-cue_191
It said that the forces are inversely as a square (so, let’s see, what else, yes),
L4-cue_192
and that the force produces changes in velocity.
L4-cue_193
Now, suppose that I watch a moving thing—for instance, I have worked out what happens
L4-cue_194
when a planet goes around a fixed sun—and now I want to work out what happens
L4-cue_195
when a planet’s going around a drifting sun.
L4-cue_196
Well, then, all of the velocities that I had in the first case are different
L4-cue_197
than in the second case; I just add a constant velocity on.
L4-cue_198
But the laws are stated in terms of changes in velocity, so that what happens is that the pull
L4-cue_199
of this planet for this changes this one’s speed—and for the other case,
L4-cue_200
changes its speed by the same amount.
L4-cue_201
#So anything that I started with—any initial speed that I started with—it just keeps
L4-cue_202
on going, and all the changes are accumulated on top of that.
L4-cue_203
That’s not a very good description, but the net result of the mathematics is
L4-cue_204
that if you add a constant speed, the laws will be exactly the same—so that we cannot,
L4-cue_205
by studying the solar system and the way the planets go around the sun,
L4-cue_206
figure out whether the sun is itself drifting through space: there’s no effect of such a drift
L4-cue_207
through space on the motion of the planets around the sun according to Newton’s laws.
L4-cue_208
So that Newton said, "The motion of bodies among themselves is the same in a space,
L4-cue_209
whether that space is itself at rest relative to fixed stars,
L4-cue_210
or is moving at a uniform velocity in a straight line."
L4-cue_211
#Now, it turns out that as time went on, that new laws were discovered after Newton;
L4-cue_212
those were the laws of electricity by Maxwell.
L4-cue_213
One of the consequences of the laws of electricity was
L4-cue_214
that there should be waves—electromagnetic waves (light, in fact,
L4-cue_215
is an example)—which should go at 186,000 miles a second—flat.
L4-cue_216
I mean, by that, 186,000 miles a second come what may.
L4-cue_217
So then it was easy to tell where rest was,
L4-cue_218
because a law like "light goes 186,000 miles a second" is certainly not one (or
L4-cue_219
at first sight is certainly not one) which is quite right,
L4-cue_220
which will permit one to move and get the same law.
L4-cue_221
#It’s evident, is it not, that if you’re in a spaceship going 100,000 miles a second
L4-cue_222
in that direction, and I’m standing still and shoot a light beam at 186,000 miles a second,
L4-cue_223
you look out the window-or if I shoot the beam through a little hole through your ship,
L4-cue_224
as it goes through your ship, since you’re going 100,000,
L4-cue_225
and the light’s going 186,000—light is only going to look
L4-cue_226
like it’s passing you at 86,000 miles a second.
L4-cue_227
#But if you do the experiment, it looks like it’s going 186,000 miles past you, and past me!
L4-cue_228
The facts of nature are not so easy to understand, and the fact of the experiment was
L4-cue_229
so obviously counter to common sense, that there are some people
L4-cue_230
who still don’t believe the result.
L4-cue_231
But experimentally, time after time, experiments indicated
L4-cue_232
that the speed is 186,000 miles a second, no matter how fast you’re moving.
L4-cue_233
#And now the question, how could that be?
L4-cue_234
Poincaré proposed that one take as one of the principles of nature that the principles
L4-cue_235
of Maxwell’s equations are right, and that the mathematical changes needed
L4-cue_236
to compare a system moving and a system standing still that come in that case should be—well,
L4-cue_237
that’s—I’m making it sound too complicated; I’ll come back and change the way of stating it:
L4-cue_238
#Einstein realized, and Poincaré, too (and it’s hard
L4-cue_239
to get the history right while you’re trying to explain the idea at the same time),
L4-cue_240
that the only possible way in which a person moving
L4-cue_241
and a person standing still could measure the speed to be the same was that their sense
L4-cue_242
of time and their sense of space are not the same—that the ticking clocks inside the
L4-cue_243
spaceship are ticking at a different speed than they are on the ground, and so forth.
L4-cue_244
Of course, you say, "Yeah, but if the clock is ticking, I look at the clock
L4-cue_245
in the spaceship, but I see it’s going slow."
L4-cue_246
"No, no: your brain is going slow too!"
L4-cue_247
#So by making sure that everything went just so inside the spaceship, it was possible to cook
L4-cue_248
up a system by which in the spaceship it would look
L4-cue_249
like 186,000 spaceship miles per spaceship second—whereas it looks
L4-cue_250
like 186,000 my miles in my seconds at the same thing.
L4-cue_251
#It was a very ingenious thing to be able to do; it turns out, remarkably enough, to be possible.
L4-cue_252
I mentioned already one of the consequences of this principle
L4-cue_253
of relativity-that you cannot tell how fast you’re moving in a straight line:
L4-cue_254
in which we had two cars, and there was an event that happened at each end
L4-cue_255
of this car-a man was standing in the middle of the car, and there was an event that happened
L4-cue_256
at each end of this car at a certain instant—which this man claimed was the same time
L4-cue_257
(because, standing in the middle of the car, he saw the light from both of these things
L4-cue_258
at the same time), whereas a man in another car, who happened to be moving this way
L4-cue_259
with a velocity, saw these same two events not at the same time,
L4-cue_260
but in fact saw the one here first, because the light reached him before the light
L4-cue_261
from here, because he was moving forward.
L4-cue_262
So, you see, that one of the consequences of the principle of symmetry for uniform velocity
L4-cue_263
in a straight line (that symmetry means you can’t tell who’s right),
L4-cue_264
is that when someone talks about something—like, when I talk about everything that’s happening
L4-cue_265
in the world now-that doesn’t mean anything.
L4-cue_266
If you’re moving along at a uniform velocity in a straight line, everything that happens at now—
L4-cue_267
simultaneous—is not the same events as my now, even though we’re passing each other,
L4-cue_268
and our instant here is the same, but somewhere else—we cannot agree what now means
L4-cue_269
at a distance.
L4-cue_270
#So this means a profound transformation of our ideas of space and time,
L4-cue_271
in order to maintain this principle that uniform velocity in a straight line cannot be detected.
L4-cue_272
Actually, what’s happening here is that the time—from one point of view,
L4-cue_273
two things that are simultaneous, seem, from another point of view,
L4-cue_274
to be not at the same time, provided they’re not
L4-cue_275
at the same place—that they’re far apart in distance.
L4-cue_276
That’s very much like my X and Y: two things which seem to me to be
L4-cue_277
at the same horizontal—well, let’s say the same distance in front—zero distance in front, will,
L4-cue_278
from somebody this way—he’ll say, "One of them is in front of me, and one is in back."
L4-cue_279
See, consider, from my point of view,
L4-cue_280
they’re both even with me—that wall and that wall—is even with me.
L4-cue_281
#But if I stand and turn like this, and look at the same pair of walls
L4-cue_282
but from a different point of view, that one’s in front of me, and that one’s behind.
L4-cue_283
And so it is that the two events, which from one point of view seem to be at the same time,
L4-cue_284
from the other point of view seem to be at different times.
L4-cue_285
And the generalization of the two—dimensional rotation that I’m talking about into space
L4-cue_286
and time was made, so that the time was added to the space to make a four—dimensional world.
L4-cue_287
#And it’s not merely an artificial addition to say, "Well, we add time to space, because,
L4-cue_288
as is seen in most of the popular books,
L4-cue_289
you cannot only locate a point, but you have to say when."
L4-cue_290
That’s all true, but that doesn’t make it real space; that just puts two things together.
L4-cue_291
Real space has, in a sense, the characteristic that ...
L4-cue_292
it’s possible to look at it from a different point of view,
L4-cue_293
that it has an existence that’s independent of the particular point of view.
L4-cue_294
There’s a commonness—there’s a certain amount of time that can get mixed up with a certain amount
L4-cue_295
of space, so that space and time must be completely interlocked.
L4-cue_296
#After this discovery, Minkowski said, "Space of itself, and time of itself,
L4-cue_297
shall sink into mere shadows, and only a kind of union of the two shall survive."
L4-cue_298
I bring this particular example up in such detail because it is really the beginning
L4-cue_299
of the study of symmetries and physical laws.
L4-cue_300
It was Poincaré’s suggestion to make this analysis of what you can do
L4-cue_301
to the equations and leave them alone.
L4-cue_302
It was Poincaré’s attitude to pay attention to the symmetries of physical laws:
L4-cue_303
the symmetries of translation in space, delay in time, and so on, were not very deep,
L4-cue_304
but the symmetry of uniform velocity in a straight line is very interesting,
L4-cue_305
and has all kinds of consequences.
L4-cue_306
#Furthermore, these consequences were extendable into laws that we did not know:
L4-cue_307
by guessing that this principle is true with the disintegration
L4-cue_308
of a mu meson (we don’t know why the mu meson disintegrates in the first place),
L4-cue_309
we can tell a lot about it by the proposition that we can’t use mu mesons
L4-cue_310
to tell how fast we’re going in the spaceship either—and that tells us something, at least,
L4-cue_311
about the mu meson disintegrations.
L4-cue_312
#There are many other symmetries of somewhat—some of are of different kinds.
L4-cue_313
#I just mentioned a—another one is that you can replace one atom by another of the same kind,
L4-cue_314
and it makes no difference to any phenomenon.
L4-cue_315
Now you say, "Yeah, what do you mean by the same kind?"—"I mean one where you replace it
L4-cue_316
by the other it doesn’t make any difference."
L4-cue_317
#It looks like physicists are always talking nonsense in a way, doesn’t it?
L4-cue_318
Because there are many different kinds, and if you replace one [atom] by one
L4-cue_319
of the different kind, it makes a difference, but if you replace one by the same kind,
L4-cue_320
it doesn’t make any difference—and that just seems like a circular definition.
L4-cue_321
But the meaning of the thing is, that there are atoms of the same kind, that it is possible
L4-cue_322
to find groups, classes of atoms, that you can replace one by another of the same kind,
L4-cue_323
and it doesn’t make any difference—there are such things.
L4-cue_324
#Since the number of atoms in any little tiny piece of material is one followed
L4-cue_325
by 23 naughts [zeros] or so, it’s very important
L4-cue_326
that they are the same—that they’re not all different kinds.
L4-cue_327
It’s really very interesting that we can classify them into a limited number
L4-cue_328
of a few hundred atoms, so that the statement that we can replace one atom by another
L4-cue_329
of the same kind has a very great amount of content.
L4-cue_330
It has the greatest amount of content in quantum mechanics,
L4-cue_331
and it is impossible for me to explain how, partly.
L4-cue_332
But only partly, because this is an audience that is mathematically untrained.
L4-cue_333
It’s quite subtle, anyhow.
L4-cue_334
But in quantum mechanics the proposition that you can replace one atom
L4-cue_335
by the same kind has marvelous consequences that produces peculiar phenomena—in liquid helium,
L4-cue_336
the liquid that flows through pipes without any resistance, just coasts on forever;
L4-cue_337
it has all kinds of consequences—in fact, it’s the origin of the whole periodic table
L4-cue_338
of the elements, and the force that keeps me from going through the floor.
L4-cue_339
But I can’t go into that particular thing, but I want
L4-cue_340
to emphasize the importance of looking at these principles.
L4-cue_341
#By this time, you’re probably convinced that all the laws of physics are symmetric under any kind
L4-cue_342
of change whatsoever, so I have to give a few ones that don’t work.
L4-cue_343
First one, change of scale: it is not true that if you build an apparatus, and come over here
L4-cue_344
and build one twice as big—every part made exactly the same, same kind of stuff but twice
L4-cue_345
as big-that it will work exactly the same way.
L4-cue_346
You who are familiar with atoms are aware of this fact,
L4-cue_347
because if I made it 10 billion times smaller, I would only have five atoms
L4-cue_348
in it-and I can’t make a machine tool, which this thing is,
L4-cue_349
with screw threads, and so on, out of five atoms.
L4-cue_350
#So it’s perfectly obvious, if we go far enough, that we can’t change the scale.
L4-cue_351
But even before the complete awareness of the atomic picture was developed,
L4-cue_352
it became apparent that this law isn’t right.
L4-cue_353
You’ve probably seen in the newspapers from time to time somebody who’s made a cathedral
L4-cue_354
with matchsticks-several floors, and beautifully delicate, and everything just-more Gothic
L4-cue_355
than any Gothic cathedral has ever been, more delicate.
L4-cue_356
Why don’t we build big ones like that, with great logs, with the same degree of ginger cake,
L4-cue_357
the same enormous degree of detail?
L4-cue_358
The answer is, if we did, it would be so high, and so heavy, it would collapse.
L4-cue_359
You say, "Yeah, but you forgot when you’re comparing two things,
L4-cue_360
you must change everything that’s in the system: the little cathedral made
L4-cue_361
with matchsticks is attracted to the earth, so to make the comparison,
L4-cue_362
I should make the big cathedral, like, attract it to an even bigger earth!"
L4-cue_363
Too bad: a bigger earth would attract it even more,
L4-cue_364
and the sticks would break even more surely."
L4-cue_365
#This fact, that the laws of physics were [not] unchanged
L4-cue_366
under scale was first discovered by Galileo.
L4-cue_367
He argued, in discussing the strength of rods and bones—he argued that if you need a bone
L4-cue_368
for a bigger animal (say, an animal is twice as high, wide, and thick),
L4-cue_369
you need eight times the weight—so you need a bone that can hold the strength eight times.
L4-cue_370
But what a bone can hold depends on its cross section, and if you made the bone twice as big,
L4-cue_371
it would only have four times the cross section, and would only be able
L4-cue_372
to support four times the weight.
L4-cue_373
#In Galileo’s book called Two New Sciences, you’ll see pictures of imaginary bones
L4-cue_374
of enormous dogs, way out of proportion.
L4-cue_375
Galileo felt that the discovery—I suppose he felt, I don’t know,
L4-cue_376
but the discovery-of the fact that the laws of nature are not unchanged on the change
L4-cue_377
of scale was as important as his laws of motion, because they’re both put together
L4-cue_378
in a tome called Two New Sciences.
L4-cue_379
#Now, I go on to another example of something that is not a symmetry law, and that is,
L4-cue_380
it is not true that if you’re spinning at a uniform angular speed in a spaceship,
L4-cue_381
you can’t tell if you’re going around; you can: everything gets thrown to the walls.
L4-cue_382
I was going to say you get dizzy, but that soon passes.
L4-cue_383
There are a lot of effects, however: things do get thrown to the walls
L4-cue_384
from the centrifugal force, or however you wish to describe it.
L4-cue_385
(I hope that there’s no teachers of freshman physics here to correct me!)
L4-cue_386
But it is possible to tell that the earth is rotating by a pendulum, or by a gyroscope,
L4-cue_387
and you’re probably aware, in various observatories and museums, and so on,
L4-cue_388
of these Foucault pendulums that prove the earth is rotating, without looking at the stars.
L4-cue_389
So it is possible to tell that we are going around at a uniform angular velocity
L4-cue_390
on the earth without looking outside, because the laws of physics are not unchanged by that.
L4-cue_391
Many people have proposed that really you’re rotating relative to the galaxies, see,
L4-cue_392
and if you would turn the galaxies, too, it wouldn’t make any difference.
L4-cue_393
#Well, I don’t know what would happen if you would turn the whole universe, and we have,
L4-cue_394
at the moment, no way to tell—nor, at the moment, do we have a theory
L4-cue_395
which describes the influence of a galaxy on things here so that it comes out of this theory
L4-cue_396
in a straightforward way (not by cheating, or forcing, or anything like that,
L4-cue_397
[but] in a straightforward way) that the inertia for rotation—that the effects of rotation,
L4-cue_398
the fact that a spinning bucket of water has a shape into a surface
L4-cue_399
like this-that this is a result of a force from the objects around.
L4-cue_400
That’s not known to be the case.
L4-cue_401
That this should be the case was called Mach’s principle—but
L4-cue_402
that it is the case has not yet been demonstrated.
L4-cue_403
#But the real question is—I mean, the more direct, experimental question is—that
L4-cue_404
if we’re rotating at a uniform velocity relative to the nebulae, do we see an effect?
L4-cue_405
The answer is yes.
L4-cue_406
If we’re moving in a spaceship at a uniform velocity in a straight line relative
L4-cue_407
to the nebulae, do we see an effect?
L4-cue_408
The answer is no—two different things.
L4-cue_409
So, don’t say all motion is relative; that’s not the content of relativity.
L4-cue_410
Relativity says that uniform velocity in a straight line,
L4-cue_411
relative to the nebulae, is undetectable.
L4-cue_412
#Now the next symmetry law that I would like to discuss is an interesting one,
L4-cue_413
because it has an interesting history, and that’s the question of reflection in space.
L4-cue_414
If I build a piece of apparatus, let’s say a clock, and then I come over here,
L4-cue_415
and I build another clock exactly the same way, but like this one looks in the mirror.
L4-cue_416
I don’t mean I look at this one in a mirror only; I mean I build another clock
L4-cue_417
which is exact built, to be a "Chinese copy" of what the other one looks like in a mirror.
L4-cue_418
In other words, I have the number 2 painted neatly on the dial here;
L4-cue_419
then I paint the number 2 the other way around over here.
L4-cue_420
(I got an opportunity to make a drawing: 2 on one part, [backwards] 2 on the other part.)
L4-cue_421
Each spring which is wound one way in one part, is wound in the corresponding opposite way
L4-cue_422
in the other clock; they match each other like two gloves, right and left.
L4-cue_423
Now we wind up the two clocks; we set them in corresponding positions (I was going
L4-cue_424
to say the same, but we set them to the mirrored positions) and we let them tick.
L4-cue_425
#Question: will they always agree with each other?
L4-cue_426
Will all the machinery of the clock go in the mirror image of the other one?
L4-cue_427
I don’t know what you would guess about that; you’d probably guess it’s true,
L4-cue_428
and most people did guess it was true.
L4-cue_429
Of course, we’re not talking about geography; we can distinguish right and left by geography:
L4-cue_430
we can say if we stand in Florida and look at New York, the ocean is on the right-and
L4-cue_431
that distinguishes right and left ...
L4-cue_432
and if the clock involved the water of the sea, and New York and so on, then it wouldn’t work
L4-cue_433
if you built it the other way because its ticker wouldn’t get in the water.
L4-cue_434
#But what we have to imagine, of course, is that the geography of the earth is turned around,
L4-cue_435
too, on the other clock—anything that’s involved must be turned around.
L4-cue_436
Nor are we interested in history: for example, if you pick up a screw in a machine shop,
L4-cue_437
the chances are it’s right—hand thread, and you might argue the other clock isn’t going
L4-cue_438
to be the same as this one, because it’s harder
L4-cue_439
to get the screws—but that’s just a question of what kind of things we make.
L4-cue_440
So that altogether, the first guess is, that it doesn’t make any difference.
L4-cue_441
#It turns out that the laws of gravitation are
L4-cue_442
such that it wouldn’t make any difference, if it worked by gravity.
L4-cue_443
The laws of electricity and magnetism are such that if, in addition, it had electric
L4-cue_444
and magnetic guts (currents and wires and whatnot),
L4-cue_445
it would still-the corresponding clock would run the same.
L4-cue_446
And if the clock involved nuclear reactions—ordinary nuclear reactions—to make it
L4-cue_447
run, it wouldn’t make any difference either, but it does make a little bit of difference;
L4-cue_448
I’ll come to what makes a difference in a minute.
L4-cue_449
#But the first possibility (it might suggest itself if you know anything much),
L4-cue_450
you may have heard that it’s possible to measure the concentration of sugar in water
L4-cue_451
by putting polarized light through the water.
L4-cue_452
If you put the piece of Polaroid that lets light through in a certain axis
L4-cue_453
through the water, then you’ll find ...
L4-cue_454
when you watch the light as it goes through deeper and deeper sugarwater,
L4-cue_455
you have to turn the Polaroid—another piece of Polaroid at the other end of the water—more
L4-cue_456
and more to the right, as the stuff goes through.
L4-cue_457
(Maybe it’s to the left; I can’t remember, but let’s say to the right,
L4-cue_458
as you go through deeper, deeper solution.)
L4-cue_459
And if you make the light go the other way through the solution,
L4-cue_460
it’s still to the right—so there’s a right—hand way; there’s a difference for right or left.
L4-cue_461
#So if we put sugarwater in the clocks, and light, then if we put, say,
L4-cue_462
in one tank of [sugar] water and make the light go through, and turn, and put the Polaroid
L4-cue_463
so it can just get through, and make the corresponding image on the other side,
L4-cue_464
hoping the light will turn this way,
L4-cue_465
it won’t-it’ll turn the other way, and it won’t go through right.
L4-cue_466
So by using sugarwater, our two clocks can be made differently.
L4-cue_467
So it’s a very remarkable fact.
L4-cue_468
#It isn’t true, therefore, at first [glance],
L4-cue_469
that the two clocks will be—that the physical laws are symmetric for reflections.
L4-cue_470
However, it’s possible to make sugar in the laboratory.
L4-cue_471
The sugar that we got that time might have been from sugar beets,
L4-cue_472
but sugar isn’t a complicated molecule, and it’s possible to make sugar in the laboratory (out
L4-cue_473
of carbon dioxide and water, and going through lots and lots of stages
L4-cue_474
in between), and make artificial sugar.
L4-cue_475
When you put the artificial sugar in there,
L4-cue_476
which is chemically (and we measure it) every way it seems
L4-cue_477
to be the same, it doesn’t turn the light.
L4-cue_478
#Then if you put bacteria in the sugarwater, bacteria eat the sugar—and
L4-cue_479
when you let the bacteria eat the sugar, and then try with what’s left, it turns out: first,
L4-cue_480
they only eat half the sugar—[half of] the artificial sugar; second, when you’re all done,
L4-cue_481
it’s turned to the left, the stuff that’s left.
L4-cue_482
#Now, you find the explanation to all this is the following:
L4-cue_483
that sugar is a complicated molecule—a set of balls (atoms) in some complicated arrangement.
L4-cue_484
If you make exactly the same arrangement, but left as right (like,
L4-cue_485
if the arrangement is complicated like this, then you make one the same way),
L4-cue_486
then every distance between every pair of atoms is the same in one as in the other;
L4-cue_487
the energy of the molecules is exactly the same—for all chemical phenomena not involving
L4-cue_488
light, they’re the same.
L4-cue_489
But living creatures find a difference: the bacteria eat one kind, and not the other.
L4-cue_490
The sugar that comes from sugar beets is only one kind,
L4-cue_491
all left—hand molecules—or right—hand, [I should say]—so it turns the light one way.
L4-cue_492
The bacteria can only eat that kind of molecule.
L4-cue_493
#When we manufacture the sugar from substances
L4-cue_494
which themselves are not asymmetrical (simple gasses), we make both kinds, in equal number.
L4-cue_495
Then, if we let the bacteria eat, they’ll eat the kind they can eat,
L4-cue_496
and the other is left—and that’s why it comes out the other way.
L4-cue_497
It’s possible to separate the two by looking through magnifying glasses
L4-cue_498
at the crystals, and separating them, ...
L4-cue_499
as Pasteur discovered, ...
L4-cue_500
so that I can definitely show that all this makes sense.
L4-cue_501
And even our artificial sugar, then, we can separate ourselves;
L4-cue_502
we don’t have to wait for the bacteria.
L4-cue_503
#But the interesting thing is that the bacteria can do this.
L4-cue_504
Does that mean that the living processes don’t obey the same laws of chemistry, and so on?
L4-cue_505
Apparently not.
L4-cue_506
It seems that in the living creatures there are many, many complicated molecules,
L4-cue_507
and they all have a kind of thread to them.
L4-cue_508
One of the most characteristic molecules in living creatures are proteins,
L4-cue_509
and it takes a little while to explain the details, but let’s put it very simply,
L4-cue_510
they have a corkscrew property and they go, let’s say, to the right.
L4-cue_511
#Now, as far as we can tell, chemically, we could make this,
L4-cue_512
chemically, the same thing to the left.
L4-cue_513
It would not function biologically, because it wouldn’t,
L4-cue_514
when it met the other proteins, fit the same way.
L4-cue_515
That is, a left—hand thread’ll fit a left—hand thread but a left
L4-cue_516
and right don’t fit very well the same way.
L4-cue_517
So the bacteria having a left—hand thread
L4-cue_518
in the chemical inside can distinguish the left and right sugar.
L4-cue_519
#How did they get that way?
L4-cue_520
Physics and chemistry cannot distinguish the molecules;
L4-cue_521
it can only make both kinds—but biology can.
L4-cue_522
It’s easy to believe that the explanation is, that long, long ago,
L4-cue_523
when the life processes first began, some accidental molecule got started
L4-cue_524
and propagated itself by reproducing itself, and so on, until, after many, many years,
L4-cue_525
these funny-looking blobs with the prongs sticking out yak
L4-cue_526
at each other-but they are nothing but the offspring of the first few molecules,
L4-cue_527
and it’s an accident of the first few molecules that it happened
L4-cue_528
to form one way instead of the other.
L4-cue_529
#It has to be one or the other, so the thing that reproduces itself is either left or right,
L4-cue_530
and then it goes on and propagates this on and on.
L4-cue_531
It’s much like the screws in the machine shop: we use right—hand thread screws
L4-cue_532
to make new right—hand thread screws, and so on.
L4-cue_533
So this is probably one of the deepest demonstrations—the fact
L4-cue_534
that the protein molecules are exactly the same in all life, they all have exactly the same kind
L4-cue_535
of thread-is probably one of the deepest demonstrations of the uniformity of the ancestry
L4-cue_536
of life, the common ancestry of all life—back, in fact, to the completely molecular level.
L4-cue_537
Now, in order to test better this question about whether the laws of physics are same right
L4-cue_538
and left, we can put the problem to ourselves this way.
L4-cue_539
#Suppose that we were in telephone conversation with a Martian or an Arcturian, or something.
L4-cue_540
We don’t know where he is and we would like to describe things to him.
L4-cue_541
We want to tell him about things.
L4-cue_542
You say, so how’s he going to understand the words, well,
L4-cue_543
that’s been studied very much by Professor Morrison here.
L4-cue_544
He has pointed out that one way would be to start out and say tick tick two,
L4-cue_545
tick tick tick three, and so on, and pretty soon the guy’d catch onto the numbers.
L4-cue_546
Then—as he understands your number system, then—you can write lots of numbers
L4-cue_547
and you could, for example, write a whole sequence of numbers that represents the weights,
L4-cue_548
the proportional weights, of the different atoms, in succession.
L4-cue_549
#Then say, hydrogen: 1.008, deuterium, and so on and so on.
L4-cue_550
And he would-after he sat down with all those numbers and piddled around a while,
L4-cue_551
would-discover that the mathematical ratios were the same as the ratios of the weights
L4-cue_552
of the elements and, therefore, those names must be for the elements—and so gradually, you could,
L4-cue_553
in talking to him, have a common language, in many ways, common.
L4-cue_554
There are many-now comes the problem.
L4-cue_555
#Suppose that he says, you fellas—after we get familiar with him, he says, "You’re very nice;
L4-cue_556
now I’d like to know what you look like."
L4-cue_557
And you start out, "Well, we’re about six feet tall."
L4-cue_558
He says, "Six feet, how big is a foot?"
L4-cue_559
"It’s very easy," you say; "six feet tall is 170 thousand million hydrogen atoms high."
L4-cue_560
Well, it’s not a joke; it’s a possible way of describing six feet to someone
L4-cue_561
that has no measure, assuming that we cannot send him any samples,
L4-cue_562
nor can we both look at the same object.
L4-cue_563
#If we have to tell him how big we are; we can do it.
L4-cue_564
That’s because the laws of physics are not unchanged under a scale change.
L4-cue_565
We can use that factor, use the properties of the scale to determine—I mean,
L4-cue_566
you can use that fact to determine the scale.
L4-cue_567
#Well, here we’ve described ourselves after telling six feet tall,
L4-cue_568
and we’re so-and-so bilateral on the outside, and we look like this,
L4-cue_569
and there are these prongs sticking out, and all this.
L4-cue_570
And he says, "That’s very interesting; what do you look like on the inside?"
L4-cue_571
So we describe the heart and so on, and we say, "Now, put the heart in on the left side."
L4-cue_572
#Now the question is, how can we tell him which side is the left side?
L4-cue_573
By what possible-you say, "Aw, you take beet sugar, see,
L4-cue_574
and you put it in water, and it turns."
L4-cue_575
Only trouble is, he has no beets up there.
L4-cue_576
Or, we have no way of knowing whether the evolution, if it was even corresponding
L4-cue_577
to the same proteins on Mars as here, whether the accidents
L4-cue_578
of the evolution would have started with maybe the wrong—handed threads—there’s no way to tell.
L4-cue_579
After much thought, you see you can’t do it, so you conclude it’s impossible.
L4-cue_580
#However, about five or six years ago, certain experiments ...
L4-cue_581
produced all kinds of puzzles (I won’t go into details); we got into tighter
L4-cue_582
and tighter difficulties, more and more paradoxical situations, until ...
L4-cue_583
Lee and Yang proposed [that] maybe the principle that right
L4-cue_584
and left symmetry—that nature’s the same for right and left—is not right, and that would help
L4-cue_585
to explain a number of mysteries.
L4-cue_586
#Lee and Yang proposed some more direct experiments to demonstrate this.
L4-cue_587
I’ll just mention the most direct of all the experiments, the easiest way to tell ...
L4-cue_588
(well, there were several "first" experiments which were quite clear,
L4-cue_589
but the one that’s easiest to explain) is this:
L4-cue_590
that when we have a radioactive disintegration ...
L4-cue_591
in which an electron and a neutrino are emitted (for example, this is one that we talked
L4-cue_592
about before, electron and antineutrino); this is a neutron disintegrating into a proton,
L4-cue_593
an electron, and an antineutrino,
L4-cue_594
or this corresponding thing can happen to a neutron in a nucleus.
L4-cue_595
Anyway, there are many radioactivities in which the charge of the nucleus increases
L4-cue_596
by one, and an electron comes out.
L4-cue_597
#The thing that’s interesting is that if you measure the spin—electrons are spinning
L4-cue_598
as they come out; if you measure the spin—you find out that they’re spinning to the left.
L4-cue_599
That is a definite significance: that the electron, when it comes out of disintegration,
L4-cue_600
is turning this way; that helical description is a left—hand thread.
L4-cue_601
It’s as though, in the beta decay, the gun that was shooting out the electron were a rifled gun,
L4-cue_602
and there’s two ways to rifle a gun,
L4-cue_603
because there’s a direction—out—and then there’s a question:
L4-cue_604
do you turn it this way, or that way, as you go out?
L4-cue_605
The experiment is, that the electrons come from a rifled gun, rifled and twisted to the left.
L4-cue_606
And so, using this fact, we can call up the Martian and say, "Listen:
L4-cue_607
take radioactive stuff" (I ought to have prepared a particular example)
L4-cue_608
"a neutron-and look at the electrons which come from such a beta decay."
L4-cue_609
#Then you define "left" by this screw thread.
L4-cue_610
Let’s see ...
L4-cue_611
it’ll take me some while to figure out how to do it in detail: say the electron’s going
L4-cue_612
up in the direction of motion, and the way it’s spinning is into the body [from the back]
L4-cue_613
on the left side—and that’s where the heart goes—something like that.
L4-cue_614
I’d have to think a little bit more on it.
L4-cue_615
#But anyway, it is possible to tell right from left, and thus,
L4-cue_616
the law of this—that the world was symmetrical for left and right—has collapsed.
L4-cue_617
#... The next thing I would like to talk about is the relationship
L4-cue_618
of conservation laws to symmetry laws.
L4-cue_619
We last time talked about conservation principles—conservation of energy, of momentum,
L4-cue_620
angular momentum, and so on; now we’re talking about symmetry laws.
L4-cue_621
It’s extremely interesting that there seems to be a deep connection
L4-cue_622
between the conservation laws and the symmetry laws.
L4-cue_623
This connection has its proper interpretation, at least as we understand it today,
L4-cue_624
only in the knowledge of quantum mechanics.
L4-cue_625
#Nevertheless, I will show you the following; I will try to explain the following:
L4-cue_626
if we will assume that the laws of physics are describable
L4-cue_627
by a minimum principle—that the paths are taken
L4-cue_628
so that some quantity is least (an idea I described once before); if we add that the laws
L4-cue_629
of nature come from a minimum principle—then we can show that if the law is
L4-cue_630
such that you can move all the equipment to one side (in other words, if it’s translatable
L4-cue_631
in space), then there must be conservation of momentum, that there’s a deep connection
L4-cue_632
between the symmetry principles and the conservation laws,
L4-cue_633
but that that connection requires that the minimum principle be assumed.
L4-cue_634
#You remember at one time we discussed one way of describing physical laws,
L4-cue_635
by saying that a particle goes from one place to another in a given length of time
L4-cue_636
by trying different paths, and the actual path taken has this property:
L4-cue_637
that there’s a certain quantity, which unfortunately happens
L4-cue_638
to be called the action (which is not to be taken to signify anything,
L4-cue_639
because it’s got nothing to do with action); anyway,
L4-cue_640
there’s a certain quantity called the action, which you calculate on this path,
L4-cue_641
and if you will calculate it for any other path, the answer’s bigger.
L4-cue_642
It’s least for the real path, and that one way of describing the laws of nature is to say
L4-cue_643
that the action—a certain mathematical quantity—is least
L4-cue_644
for the actual path, than for any other path.
L4-cue_645
#Now, another way of saying the thing is least is to say this:
L4-cue_646
that if you move the path a little bit, at first it doesn’t make any difference.
L4-cue_647
Suppose you were walking around ...
L4-cue_648
on mountains, on hills—but smooth hills, please, smooth—the mathematical things
L4-cue_649
that are involved here correspond to smooth things.
L4-cue_650
We’re walking around on hills and valleys, and we come to a place where we’re lowest.
L4-cue_651
Then I say, if you take a small step forward you won’t change your height.
L4-cue_652
When you’re at the lowest (or at the highest) point, a step doesn’t make any difference
L4-cue_653
in the altitude, in first approximation, whereas, if you’re on a slope,
L4-cue_654
you can walk down the slope with a step—and then if you take the step
L4-cue_655
in the opposite direction, you walk up.
L4-cue_656
That’s the key to the reason why, when you’re at the lowest place,
L4-cue_657
taking a step doesn’t make much difference,
L4-cue_658
because if it did make any difference you could put the step in the opposite direction,
L4-cue_659
you’d go down-I mean, if it went up one way, it would go down another way,
L4-cue_660
but since this is the lowest point and you can’t go down,
L4-cue_661
in first approximation the step doesn’t make any difference.
L4-cue_662
We therefore know that if we move this path a little bit,
L4-cue_663
in first approximation it doesn’t make any difference to the action.
L4-cue_664
#Now, I want you to consider the following possible other path.
L4-cue_665
First, we jump immediately over to another place here nearby.
L4-cue_666
Then, we go along—(this sticks out too far to make the diagram clear, so if you’ll permit me
L4-cue_667
to just change the shape of the path)—we move on exactly the corresponding path to another point,
L4-cue_668
here, which is displaced the same amount, of course;
L4-cue_669
this is the corresponding path, to the side.
L4-cue_670
Now we have just discovered that the laws of nature are such that the action—the total amount
L4-cue_671
of action—going on this path is the same, in first approximation, to that path.
L4-cue_672
That’s from a minimum principle, when it’s the real motion.
L4-cue_673
#Now, I show you something else.
L4-cue_674
That the action on this path is the same as the action from this little cross
L4-cue_675
to that little cross if the world is the same when you move everything over,
L4-cue_676
because the difference of these two is only that you moved everything over.
L4-cue_677
If the symmetry principle of translation in space is right, if that’s right,
L4-cue_678
then the total action between the crosses is the same as between the dots.
L4-cue_679
But for the true motion, the total action
L4-cue_680
on this cockeyed path here is about—is very closely—the same
L4-cue_681
as for the original one (subtracting equals from equals, and so on, and so on); anyway,
L4-cue_682
you could probably see, therefore, that the contribution from this little section
L4-cue_683
and from this little section are equal.
L4-cue_684
But in making this little motion, we’re going this way,
L4-cue_685
and making this one, we’re going the other way.
L4-cue_686
#... So the contribution of this, taken as the effect of moving that way, and the contribution
L4-cue_687
of this, thinking of it as an effect of moving that way,
L4-cue_688
but making it the other sign (because it’s the other way), we see that there is a quantity here
L4-cue_689
which has to match the quantity here, to cancel out—which is the effect on the action
L4-cue_690
of a little tiny step in the X direction: there is that quantity, the effect on the action
L4-cue_691
of a small step in the X direction, [that] is the same at the beginning as at the end.
L4-cue_692
There is a quantity, therefore, that doesn’t change as time goes on,
L4-cue_693
provided the minimum principle works, and the symmetry principle
L4-cue_694
of displacement in space is right.
L4-cue_695
#Now, this quantity which doesn’t change is, in fact,
L4-cue_696
exactly the momentum that we discussed last time.
L4-cue_697
A corresponding argument for the displacement in time, the delay in time,
L4-cue_698
comes out as a conservation of energy; the case that if we rotate
L4-cue_699
in space doesn’t make any difference,
L4-cue_700
comes out as the conservation of angular momentum, and so on.
L4-cue_701
That we can reflect and it makes no difference doesn’t come out to be anything simple,
L4-cue_702
in the classical sense; it hasn’t, therefore, got a simple classical interpretation.
L4-cue_703
People have called it parity, and they have a conservation law called the conservation
L4-cue_704
of parity, but those are just complicated words in the case of the quantum mechanics;
L4-cue_705
all we’re saying is, that the right and left symmetry law is not valid.
L4-cue_706
#I have to mention that conservation of parity, because you may have read in the papers
L4-cue_707
that the law of conservation of parity has been proved wrong; it should have been written,
L4-cue_708
because it’s much easier to understand, [that] the principle
L4-cue_709
that you can’t distinguish right and left has been proved wrong.
L4-cue_710
#Now, I would like to say, as we go on about other symmetries,
L4-cue_711
that there are a few problems—new problems: for instance, for every particle, like an electron,
L4-cue_712
there’s an antiparticle (a positron).
L4-cue_713
For a proton, there’s an antiproton.
L4-cue_714
We can make, in principle, what we call antimatter,
L4-cue_715
in which every atom has its corresponding anti pieces put together.
L4-cue_716
For example, a hydrogen atom is a proton and an electron.
L4-cue_717
If we take an antiproton, which is electrically negative, and a positron, and put them together,
L4-cue_718
they will also make a kind of hydrogen atom, an antihydrogen atom—in principle;
L4-cue_719
it’s never been made, in fact, but this is figured out,
L4-cue_720
that we could make this—we could make all kinds of antimatter in the same manner.
L4-cue_721
#Well, the question is, whether the matter works the same as the antimatter.
L4-cue_722
As far as we know, it does.
L4-cue_723
One of the laws of symmetry is that if we make stuff out of antimatter,
L4-cue_724
it’ll behave the same way as do when we make the corresponding stuff out of matter.
L4-cue_725
(Of course if they come together they annihilate;
L4-cue_726
there would be sparks and everything else.)
L4-cue_727
It was believed that this is true: that matter and antimatter have the same laws.
L4-cue_728
#Now, the next question is this: once it’s found that the left and right is wrong (the left
L4-cue_729
and right symmetry is wrong), an important question comes.
L4-cue_730
#... If I look at this disintegration, but with antimatter—an antineutron goes
L4-cue_731
into an antiproton plus an antielectron (that’s a positron) plus a neutrino—the question is,
L4-cue_732
does the antimatter behave like the matter in the sense that it comes
L4-cue_733
out left-hand thread, or does it behave the other way?
L4-cue_734
It turns out, we think (up until a few months ago), that it behaves the opposite way;
L4-cue_735
that the antimatter behaves like it goes to the right, where matter goes to the left.
L4-cue_736
And so there was another principle—and [therefore], in fact,
L4-cue_737
we really can’t tell a Martian which is right and left, because if he happens to be made
L4-cue_738
out of antimatter, he’d get the thing the other way, because when he does his experiment,
L4-cue_739
his positrons are coming out, puts the heart on the wrong side.
L4-cue_740
And so you can see that if the Martian—if you telephone the Martian,
L4-cue_741
and explain how to make a man, and suppose he makes one and it works, ...
L4-cue_742
and you explain to him also all our social conventions, and so on.
L4-cue_743
#Then when we go finally to meet this man (after he tells us how
L4-cue_744
to build a sufficiently good spaceship), we go to meet this man, and you walk up to him
L4-cue_745
and you put out your right hand to shake hands—if he puts out his right hand, okay,
L4-cue_746
but if he puts out his left hand, watch out,
L4-cue_747
because the two of you will annihilate with each other!
L4-cue_748
#Now, these are all the symmetries that I have time to tell you about; I wish I could tell you
L4-cue_749
about a few more, but they become more difficult technically to explain.
L4-cue_750
... There are some very remarkable things, which are the near symmetries, the remarkable feature
L4-cue_751
of this effect (that we can distinguish right and left) is that we can distinguish right
L4-cue_752
and left only with a very weak effect, with this beta disintegration.
L4-cue_753
#What it means, that nature is 99.99 indistinguishable right from left,
L4-cue_754
but that there’s just one little piece, one little characteristic phenomenon,
L4-cue_755
which is completely different in the sense that it’s absolutely lopsided,
L4-cue_756
is a mystery that no one has the slightest idea about yet.
L4-cue_757
#Thank you.